Simplify table article (#453)
Sage-Bionetworks/synapseDocs: articles/tables.md

}
</style>

# Tables

> Synapse `Tables` are designed to provide users the ability to create web-accessible, sharable, and queryable data. Columns in tables can have a user-specified, structured schema. Users may define table columns to contain common primitive data types (text, numbers, dates, etc.) or references to other Synapse objects (e.g., `Files`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synapse `Tables` are designed to provide users the ability to create web-accessible, sharable, and queryable data. Columns in tables have a user-specified, structured schema. Users define table columns to contain common primitive data types (text, numbers, dates, etc.) or references to other Synapse objects (e.g., `Files`). 
```

> `Tables` may be queried and edited through both the Synapse web UI as well as through our analytical clients that enable direct access to these data from analysis pipeline code. Unlike most NoSQL systems, the data in Synapse `Tables` is strongly consistent, not eventually consistent. This is an important design consideration for scientific data processing, as analysis on eventually-consistent data sources can limit the types of analysis performed, and may require special coding strategies to ensure reasonable accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Tables` may be queried and edited through both the Synapse web UI as well as through our programmatic clients. Unlike most NoSQL systems, the data in Synapse `Tables` is strongly consistent, not eventually consistent. This is an important design consideration for scientific data processing, as analysis on eventually-consistent data sources can limit the types of analysis performed, and may require special coding strategies to ensure reasonable accuracy.
```

> `Tables` may be queried and edited through both the Synapse web UI as well as through our analytical clients that enable direct access to these data from analysis pipeline code. Unlike most NoSQL systems, the data in Synapse `Tables` is strongly consistent, not eventually consistent. This is an important design consideration for scientific data processing, as analysis on eventually-consistent data sources can limit the types of analysis performed, and may require special coding strategies to ensure reasonable accuracy.

Reviewer: 'may require special coding strategies' - using eventually-consistent sources also requires special coding strategies - i.e., waiting, and maybe planning for timeout failures.

> To learn more about working with tables using one of our analytic clients, including code examples for the below tasks, see:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about working with tables using one of our programmatic clients, including code examples for the below tasks, see:
```

* Tables in [Python Docs](https://python-docs.synapse.org/build/html/Table.html).
* Tables in [R Docs](https://r-docs.synapse.org/articles/tables.html).

# Creating a Table

> Tables require structure data, such as that contained in a .CSV or .TSV file. If your structured data is saved in an Excel format such as .XLS or .XLSX, please "save-as" a .CSV to proceed. This helps ensure your data will import cleanly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tables require structured data, such as that contained in a `.csv` or `.tsv` file. If your structured data is saved in an Excel format such as `.xls` or `.xlsx`, please "save-as" a `.csv` to proceed.
```

> Navigate to the Tables tab on your project. You have to option to create an empty table by clicking on the **Add Table** button under the Tools menu, or to upload your existing data in .CSV or .TSV format by clicking the **Upload a Table** button. If you create an empty table, you'll need to start by defining your schema (see below). If you create a Table by uploading an existing file, first attach your file, click "Save", and then you will be presented with a preview of your data and some advanced options for defining separators and declaring whether or not your first line is a header. Synapse will automatically attempt to detect the table schema based on these options. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the Tables tab on your project. You have the option to create an empty table by clicking on the **Add Table** button under the Tools menu, or to upload your existing data in `.csv` or `.tsv` format by clicking the **Upload a Table** button. If you create an empty table, you'll need to start by defining your schema (see below). If you create a Table by uploading an existing file, first attach your file, click "Save", and then you will be presented with a preview of your data and some advanced options for defining separators and declaring whether or not your first line is a header. Synapse will automatically attempt to detect the table schema based on these options. 
```

After clicking on "Next", you will see the option to rename your Table and, optionally, define your schema more specifically. 

## Defining a Schema

> Synapse `Tables` require that you specify the types of data in each column included in the `Table`. If you are creating an empty Table, these columns can be specified manually by clicking on **Add Column** and selecting the column type you wish to add. If you are uploading an existing file, Synapse will recommend column types during upload. If allowing Synapse to recommend column types, be sure to verify that these column types represent your data well. You will be presented with Synapse's best guess under the button labeled "Schema Options" during import. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synapse `Tables` require that you specify the types of data in each column included in the `Table`. If you are creating an empty Table, these columns can be specified manually by clicking on **Add Column** and selecting the column type you wish to add. If you are uploading an existing file, Synapse will recommend column types during upload. If you allow Synapse to recommend column types, be sure to verify that these column types represent your data well. You will be presented with a best guess under the button labeled "Schema Options" during import. 
```

> Synapse currently supports several kinds of text columsn (STRING, LARGE TEXT), dates (as TIMESTAMP), and a variety of numericcolumns (INTEGER, DOUBLE), and including various Synapse IDs directly (ENTITYID, USER). For a complete list of column types and definitions, please see the [REST docs on columnTypes](https://docs.synapse.org/rest/org/sagebionetworks/repo/model/table/ColumnType.html). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synapse currently supports several kinds of text columns (STRING, LARGE TEXT), dates (as TIMESTAMP), and a variety of numeric columns (INTEGER, DOUBLE), and various Synapse identifiers (ENTITYID, USER). For a complete list of column types and definitions, please see the [REST docs on columnTypes](https://docs.synapse.org/rest/org/sagebionetworks/repo/model/table/ColumnType.html). 
```

<img id="image" src="/assets/images/tableSchema.png">

> Note: Each analytic client has a utility function to create columns from a data frame. Please see the [Python Docs](https://python-docs.synapse.org/build/html/Table.html) or [R Docs](https://r-docs.synapse.org/articles/tables.html) for examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Each programmatic client has a utility function to create columns from a data frame. Please see the [Python Docs](https://python-docs.synapse.org/build/html/Table.html) or [R Docs](https://r-docs.synapse.org/articles/tables.html) for examples.
```

## Adding Data to Tables

> If you have imported an existing .CSV or .TSV, all of your data will be imported at once. For very large files, it may take a moment for the Table to fully build and index in order to be queried. You can navigate away from the Tables once you have clicked "Create" and you will not lose any data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have imported an existing `.csv` or `.tsv`, all of your data will be imported at once. For very large files, it may take a while for the Table to be built and indexed completely before it can be used. You can navigate away from the Tables once you have clicked "Create" and you will not lose any data. 
```

> If you have created an empty Table, you will need to click on "Add Data to Table" to upload a .CSV or .TSV file, or add rows individually through the web UI. To add rows, click on the **Edit Query Results** icon to the right of the query button to get to the **Edit Rows** pop-up. From there, you can add rows by click the **+** at the top.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have created an empty Table, you will need to click on "Add Data to Table" to upload a `.csv` or `.tsv` file, or add rows individually through the web UI. To add rows, click on the **Edit Query Results** icon to the right of the query button to get to the **Edit Rows** pop-up. From there, you can add rows by click the **+** at the top.
```

## Set Facets
In order to use simple search, you must first set columns to be facets in the schema editor. Select **Schema** in the upper right of your table and click on **Edit Schema**. In the resulting pop-up, select **Values** or **Range** from the dropdowns under the **Facet** option. **Values** can be thought of as categories whereas **Range** is a date or number.

<img id="imageLg" src="/assets/images/set_facets.png">

{% include note.html content="If you change Column Type in the schema, you have to set its facet selection again." %}

To see all the facets, click on **Show simple search** found above the SQL-query bar:

<img id="imageLg" src="/assets/images/show_simple_search.png">

Select the features you are interested in to filter the table.

<img id="imageLg" src="/assets/images/simple_search.png">

## Toggling between Simple and Advanced Search

> You can toggle from the simple search to the advanced search without losing the query results. For example, if in the simple search you had selected treatmentArm `A`, age of `23:64`, and gender as `female`, the query will be preserved in the advanced search bar. However, this is unidirectional because the advance search allows parameters that are not available with facets. Therefore switching from advanced to simple search will result in resetting the search query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can toggle from the simple search to the advanced search without losing the query results. For example, if in the simple search you had selected treatmentArm `A`, age of `23:64`, and gender as `female`, the query will be preserved in the advanced search bar. However, this is unidirectional because the advanced search allows parameters that are not available with facets. Therefore switching from advanced to simple search will result in resetting the search query.
```
